

===== PAGE 1 =====

 
The Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011. 
 
NOTIFICATION 
7th March 2011 
 
GSR 202 (E) --- In exercise of the powers conf erred by sub-section (1) read with clause 
(j) and (q) of sub-section (2 ) of section 52 of the Legal Metrology Act 2009, (1 of 2010), 
the Central Government hereby makes the following rules, namely:- 
 
1. Short title and Commencement.- 
(1)These rules may be called The Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 
2011. 
(2) They shall come into force on the 1st day of April, 2011. 
 
2. Definitions:- 
In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires- 
(a) “Act” means the Legal Metrology Act 2009, (1 of 2010); 
(b) “dealer” in relation to any commodity in  packaged form, means a person who, or a 
firm which, carries on directly or otherwise,  the business of buying, selling, supplying or 
distributing any such commodity whether for cash or for deferred payment or for 
commission, remuneration or other valuable  consideration, and includes a commission 
agent who carries on such busin ess on behalf of any princi pal, but does not include a 
manufacturer who manufactur es any commodity which is sold or distributed in a 
packaged form except where such commodity is  sold by such manuf acturer to any other 
person other than a dealer ; 
(c) “lot” means –  
(i) in the case of packages which have been  stored, the total number of such packages 
stored; and  
(ii) in the case of packages which are on or  at the end of the packing line, the maximum 
hourly output of packages;’ 
Page 1 of 43 

===== PAGE 2 =====

(d) “m
anufacturer” in relation to any commodity in packaged form, means a person who, 
or a firm which, produces, makes or manu factures such commodity and includes a 
person, firm which puts, or causes to be put , any mark on any packaged commodity, not 
produced, made or manufactured by him or it, and the mark claims the commodity in the 
package to be a commodity produced, made or  manufactured by such person or firm, as 
the case may be; 
(e) “'Maximum permissible error”, in relation to the quantity contained in an individual 
package, means an error in deficiency which, subject to the provision of these rules, does 
not exceed the limits specified in the First Schedule; 
(f) “net quantity”, in relation to commodity contained in a package, means the quantity by 
weight, measure or number of such commodity contained in that package, excluding the 
packaging or wrapper; 
(g) “packer” means a person who, or a firm, which pre-packs any commodity, whether in 
any bottle, tin, wrapper or otherwise, in units suitable for sale whether wholesale or retail; 
(h) “principal display panel”, in relation to a package, means the total surface area of the 
package where the information required under these rules are to be given in the following 
manner, namely; 
(i) all the information could be grouped together and given at one place; or  
(ii) the pre-printed information could be gr ouped together and given in one place and on 
line information grouped together in other place; 
(i) “quantity” in relation to commodity c ontained in a package, means the quantity by 
weight, measure or number of such commodity contained in that package; 
(j) “retail dealer” in relation to any commod ity in packaged form means a dealer who 
directly sells such packages to the consumer and includes, in relation to such packages as 
are sold directly to the consumer, a wholesale dealer who makes such direct sale; 
(k) “retail package” means the packages which are intended for retail sale to the ultimate 
consumer for the purpose of consumption of the commodity contained therein and 
includes the imported packages : 
Provided that for the purposes of this clause, the expression 'ultimate consumer' shall not 
include industrial or institutional consumers; 
Page 2 of 43 

===== PAGE 3 =====

(l) “retail sale”, in relation to a com
modity, means the sa le, distribution or delivery of 
such commodity through retail sales shops agencies or other instrumentalities for 
consumption by an individual or a group of individuals or any other consumer; 
(m) “retail sale price” means the maximum price at which the commodity in packaged 
form may be sold to the consumer and the price shall be printed on the package in the 
manner given below; 
'Maximum or Max. retail price Rs/
 .......inclusive of all taxes or in the form MRP 
Rs/
 .........incl., of all taxes after taking into accoun t   the fraction of less than fifty paisa 
to be rounded off to the preceding rupees and fraction of above 50 paise and up to 95 
paise to the rounded off to fifty paise;  
(n) “section” means a section of the Act; 
(o) “Schedule” means a Schedule appended to these rules; 
(p) “standard package” means a package containing the specif ied quantity of a 
commodity; 
(q) “wholesale dealer” in relation to any co mmodity in packaged form means a dealer 
who does not directly sell such commodity to any consumer but distributes or sells such 
commodity through one or more intermediaries; 
(r) “wholesale package” means a package contai ning- (i)  a number of retail packages, 
where such first mentioned package is intende d for sale, distribution or delivery to an 
intermediary and is not intended for sale direct to a single consumer; or 
(ii) a commodity sold to an intermediary in bulk to enable such intermediary to sell, 
distribute or deliver such commodity to the consumer in smaller quantities; or, 
(iii) packages containing  ten or more than ten retail packages provided that the retail 
packages are labeled as required under the rules.  
(r)  words and expression used herein and not defined but defined in the Act, shall have 
the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Act.  
 
Page 3 of 43 

===== PAGE 4 =====

CHAP
TER –II 
PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO PACKAGES INTENDED FOR RETAIL SALE 
 
3. Applicability of the Chapter-  
The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to,-  
(a) packages of commodities containing quantity of more than 25 kg or 25 litre excluding 
cement and fertilizer sold in bags up to 50 kg; and 
(b) packaged commodities meant for industrial consumers or institutional consumers. 
Explanation :- For the purpose of this rule,- 
i) “institutional consumer” means the inst itutional  consumer like transportation, 
Airways, Railways, Hotels, Hospitals or any other service institutions who buy  packaged 
commodities directly from the manufacturer for use by that institution. 
ii) “industrial Consumer” means the i ndustrial consumer who buy packaged  
commodities directly from the manufacturer for use by that industry. 
 
4. Regulation for pre-packing and sale etc. of commodities in packaged form. –  
On and from the commencement of these rule s, no person shall pre-pack or cause or 
permit to be pre-packed any commodity for sale, distribution or delivery unless the 
package in which the commodity is pre-pack ed bears thereon or, a label is securely 
affixed thereto such declarations as are required to be made under these rules. 
Explanation.- The existence of packages without the declaration of retail sale price within 
the manufacturer’s premises shall not be cons trued as a violation of  these rules and it 
shall be ensured that all packages leavi ng the premises of manufacturer for their 
destination shall have declaration of retail sale price on them as required in these rules. 
 
5. Specific commodities to be packed and sold in recommended standard packages. - 
The commodities specified in the Second Sche dule shall be packed for sale, distribution 
or delivery in such standard quantities as are specified in that Schedule:  
*Provided that if a commodity specified in th e Second Schedule is packed in a size other 
than that prescribed in that Schedule, a decl aration that 'Not a sta ndard pack size under 
the Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011 or 'non standard size under 
Page 4 of 43 

===== PAGE 5 =====

the Legal M
etrology (packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011' shall be made prominently on 
the label of such package. 
* Provision will stand withdrawn wef 01.07.2012 vide GSR 748(E) dated 24.10.2011 
6.   Declarations to be made on every package. –  
(1) Every package shall bear thereon or on th e label securely affixed thereto, a definite, 
plain and conspicuous declaration made in acco rdance with the provisions of this chapter 
as, to - 
(a) the name and address of the manufacturer , or where the manufacturer is not the 
packer, the name and address of the manuf acturer and packer and for any imported 
package the name and address of the importer shall be mentioned. 
Explanation I.- If any name and address of a company is mentioned on the label without 
any qualifying words 'manufactured by' or 'packed by', it shall be presumed that such 
name and address shall be that of the manufact urer and the liability shall be determined 
accordingly;  
Explanation II. - If the brand name and addres s of the brand owner appear on the label as 
a marketer, then the brand owner shall be held responsible for any violation of these rules 
and action as may be required shall be initiated against the deemed  manufacturer and in 
the event of more than one name and address appearing in the label, prosecution shall be 
launched against the manufacturer indicated on the label in th e first place and not against 
all of them.  
Explanation III. - In respect of packages c ontaining food articles, the provisions of this 
sub-rule shall not apply, and instead, the requirement of the Prevention of Food 
Adulteration Act, 1954 (37 of 1954) and the rules made there under shall apply  
(b) The common or generic names of the co mmodity contained in the package and in 
case of packages with more than one product,  the name and number or quantity of each 
product shall be mentioned on the package.  
(c) The net quantity, in terms of the standard unit of weight or measure, of the commodity 
contained in the package or where the commodity is packed or sold by number, the 
number of the commodity contained in the package shall be mentioned. 
(d) The month and year in which the comm odity is manufactured or pre-packed or 
imported shall be mentioned in the package.  
Page 5 of 43 

===== PAGE 6 =====

Provided that for packages containing food arti cles, the provisions of the Prevention of 
Food Adulteration Act 1954 (37 of 1954) and the rules m
ade there under shall apply; 
Provided further that nothing in this sub-clause shall apply in case of packages containing 
seeds which are labeled and certified under th e provisions of the Seeds Act, 1966 (54 of 
1966) and the rules made there under; 
*Provided that a manufacturer may indicate the month and year using a rubber stamp 
without overwriting. 
* Provisio will stand withdrawn wef 01.07.2012 vide GSR 748(E) dated 24.10.2011 
Provided also that for packages containing cosmetics products, the provisions of the 
Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 shall apply.  
(e) the retail sale price of the package; 
Provided that for packages containing alcohol ic beverages or spir ituous liquor, the State 
Excise Laws and the rules made there under shal l be applicable within the State in which 
it is manufactured and where th e state excise laws and ru les made there under do not 
provide for declaration of retail sale price, the provisions of these rules shall apply.     
(f) Where the sizes of the commodity cont ained in the package are relevant, the 
dimensions of the commodity contained in the package and if the dimensions of the 
different pieces are different, the dimensions  of each such different piece shall be 
mentioned. 
(g) such other matter as are specified in these rules: 
Provided that -- 
(A) no declaration as to  the month and year in which th e commodity is manufactured or 
pre-packed shall be required to be made on-- 
(i) any package containing bidis or incense sticks; 
(ii) any domestic liquefied petroleum gas cylinder of 14.2kg or 5kg, bottled and marketed 
by a public sector undertaking; 
(B) where any packaging material bearing thereon the month in which any commodity 
was expected to have been pre-packed is  not exhausted during that month, such 
packaging material may be used for pre-p acking the concerned commodity produced or 
manufactured during the next succeeding mo nth and not there after, but the Central 
Government may, if it is satisfied that such  packaging material could not be exhausted 
Page 6 of 43 

===== PAGE 7 =====

during the period aforesaid by reason of any c
ircumstance beyond the control of the 
manufacturer or packer as the case may ex tend the time during which such packaging 
material may be used, and , where any such packaging material is exhausted before the 
expiry of the month indicated thereon, the p ackaging material intended to be used during 
the next succeeding month may be used for pre-packing the concerned commodity; 
Provided that the said provision shall not apply to the packages containing food products, 
where the 'Best before or Use before' period is ninety days or less from the date of 
manufacture or packing.' 
(C) no declaration as to the retail sale price shall be required to be made on  
(i) any package containing bidi; 
(ii) any domestic liquefied petroleum gas cylinder of which the price is covered under the 
Administrative Price Mechanism of the Government. 
Explanation I: The month and the year in which commodity is pre-packed may be 
expressed either in words, or by numerals indicating the month and the year, or by both. 
(2) Every package shall bear the name, address, telephone number, e mail address, if 
available, of the person who can be or th e office which can be, contacted, in case of 
consumer complaints. 
(3) It shall not be permissible to affix individual stickers on the package for altering or 
making declaration required under these rules: 
Provided that for reducing the Maximum Retail Price (MRP), a sticker with the revised 
lower MRP (inclusive of all taxes) may be affixed and the same shall not cover the MRP 
declaration made by the manuf acturer or the packer, as th e case may be, on the label of 
the package. 
(4) It shall be permissible to use stickers  for making any declaration other than the 
declaration required to be made under these rules. 
(5) Where a commodity consists of a numbe r of components and these components are 
packed in two or more units, for sale as a single commodity, the d eclaration required to 
be made under sub-rule (1) shall appear on the main package and such package shall also 
carry information about the other accompanyi ng packages or such declaration may be 
given on individual packages and intimation to that effect may be given on the main 
Page 7 of 43 

===== PAGE 8 =====

package and if the com
ponents are sold as spar e parts, all declaratio ns shall be given on 
each package. 
(6) Any packaging material or wrapper which could not be exhausted by the 
manufacturer or packer, may be used for packing of the material up to *31st March, 2012, 
or till such date the packaging material or wrapper is exhausted, whichever is earlier, 
after making corrections required under these rules by way of stamping, or putting sticker 
or on-line printing, as the case may be.  
* Time extended vide GSR 734(E) dated 30.09. 2011 
7. Principal display panel-its area, size and letter etc.-  
(1) In the case of a package having a capac ity of five cubic cen timeters or less, the 
principal display panel may be a card or tape affixed firmly to the package and shall bear 
the required information. 
(2) The height of any numeral in the decl aration required under these rules, on the 
principal display panel shall not be less than,- 
(i) as shown in Table-I, if the net quantity is declared in terms of weight or volume; 
(ii) as shown in Table-II, if the net quantity is declared in terms of length, area or number. 
(3) The height of letters in the declaration shall not be less than 1 mm height and when 
blown, formed, molded, embossed or perforate d, the height of letters shall not be less 
than 2 mm. 
Provided that the width of the letter or numer al shall not be less than one third of its 
height, except in the case of numeral `1' and letters (i), (I) and (l); 
 
TABLE-I 
Minimum height of numeral 
 
Serial 
Number 
Net quantity in weight / 
volume 
Minimum height in mm 
  Normal case When blown , formed, molded, 
embossed or perforated on 
container 
1 Up to 200g/ ml 1 2 
Page 8 of 43 

===== PAGE 9 =====

2 Above 200g/ ml and up 
to 500g/ml 
2 4 
3 Above 500g/ ml 4 6 
 
TABLE-II 
Minimum height of numeral 
 
Serial Number 
 
Net quantity in length, area 
or number,               
area of principal display panel 
Minimum height in mm 
                        Normal case When blown , formed, 
molded, embossed or 
perforated on 
container 
1 Up to 100 cm2 1 2 
2 Above 100 cm2 and up to 500 
cm2 
2 4 
3 Above 500 cm2 and up to 
2500 cm2 
4 6 
4 Above 2500 cm2 6 6 
 
(4) The provisions under sub-rule (1) to (3) shall not apply to a package if the information 
to be specified on such package under this ru le is also required to be given by or under 
any other law for the time being in force. 
8. Declaration where to appear.- 
(1) Every declaration required to be made under these rules shall appear on the principal 
display panel. 
Provided that the area surrounding the quantit y declaration shall be free from printed 
information. 
(a) above and below by a space  equal to at least the hei ght of the numeral in the 
declaration, and 
(b) to the left and right by a space at least twice the height of numeral in the declaration. 
Page 9 of 43 

===== PAGE 10 =====

(2) For soft drink, ready to serve fruit beverages or the like, the bottle which is returnable
 
by the consumer for being refilled, the retail sale price may be indicated either on the 
crown cap, or on the bottle or on both and if th e retail sale price is indicated on the crown 
cap or the bottle, it is sufficient to indicate the retail sale price in the form of 'MRP Rs....'. 
 
9. Manner in which declaration shall be made.-  
(1) Every declaration which is required to be made on a package under these rules shall 
be -- 
(a) legible and prominent; 
(b) numerals of the retail sale price and net quantity declaration shall be printed, painted 
or inscribed on the package in a colour that contrasts conspicuously with the background 
of the label; 
Provided that,-- 
(a) where any label information is blown, form ed or molded on a glass or plastic surface 
such information need not be required to be presented in a contrasting colour; 
(b) where any declaration on a package is prin ted either in the form  of hand-writing or 
hand-script, such declaration shall be clear, unambiguous and legible. 
(2) No declaration shall be made so as to  require it to be read through any liquid 
commodity contained in the package. 
(3) Where a package is provided with an outsi de container or wrappe r such container or 
wrapper shall also contain al l the declarations which are required to appear on the 
package except where such container or wrappe r itself is transparent and the declarations 
on the package itself are easily readable through such outside wrapper. 
Provided that no such declarations on the inner package is required if the inner package 
does not contain any declaration on its outer cover.  
(4) The particulars of the declarations requi red to be specified under this rule on a 
package shall either be in Hindi in Devnagri script or in English: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-rule shal l prevent the use of any other 
language in addition to Hindi or English language. 
 
10. Declaration of name and address of the manufacturer, etc.- 
Page 10 of 43 

===== PAGE 11 =====

(1) Subject to the provisions of rule 6, every package kept, offered or exposed for sale or 
sold shall bear conspicuously on
 it, the name and complete  address of the manufacturer, 
or where the manufacturer is not the packer, the name and address of the manufacturer 
and the packer and in case of imported packages, the name and address of the importer: 
Provided that for packages of capacity 5 cubic cm or less, it shall be a sufficient 
compliance of this sub-rule, if a mark or in scription which would enable the consumer to 
identify the manufacturer or packer or the importer, as the case may be, is made on the 
package: 
Provided further that where any commodity manufactured outside In dia is packed in 
India, the package shall also contain on the principal display panel the name and 
complete address of the packer or the importer in India. 
Explanation.- In this sub-rule, ' complete a ddress' means, the postal address at which the 
factory is situated, and, in any other case, the name of the street, number (if any) assigned 
to the premises of the manufacturer or packer  and either the name of the city and State 
where the business is carried on by the manufacturer or packer or the Postal Index 
Number [PIN] Code so that a consumer can  identify and locate the manufacturer or 
packer or importer, as the case may be. 
(2) The name of the manufacturer or packer  or importer shall be the actual corporate 
name, or if not incorporate d, the name under which the bus iness is conducted by such 
manufacturer or packer or importer in India. 
 
11. General provisions relating to declaration of quantity.— 
(1) In declaring the ne t quantity of the commodity containe d in a package, the weight of 
wrappers and materials other than the commodity shall be excluded.-- 
(2)Where a commodity in a package is not li kely to undergo any vari ation in weight or 
measure, on account of the environmenta l conditions, the quantity declared on the 
package shall correspond to the net quantity which will be received by the consumer, and 
the declaration of quantity of the commodity as declared on the package, and the 
declaration of quantity on such package shall not be qualified by the words 'when packed' 
or the like. 
Page 11 of 43 

===== PAGE 12 =====

(3) Save as otherwise provided in sub-rule (4), where a commodity in package is lik
ely to 
undergo variations in weight or measure on account of environmental conditions and 
such variation is negligible, the declaration of  quantity in relation to such package shall 
be made after taking into account such varia tion so that the consumer may receive not 
less than the net quantity of the commodity  as declared on the package, and the 
declaration of quantity on such package shall not also be qualified by the words 'when 
packed' or the like. 
(4) The declaration of quantity in relation to commodities which are likely to undergo 
significant variations in weight or measures on account of environmental or other 
conditions may be qualified by the words “w hen packed”, as spec ified in the Third 
Schedule. 
 
12. Manner in which declaration of quantity shall be.— 
(1) The declaration of quantity shall be ex pressed in terms of such unit of weight, 
measure or number or a combination of wei ght, measure or number as would give an 
accurate and adequate information to the cons umer with regard to the quantity of the 
commodity contained in the package. 
(2) Except in the cases of commodities specified  in the Fourth Schedule, the declaration 
of quantity shall be in terms of the unit of - 
(a) mass, if the commodity is solid, semi-solid, viscous or a mixture of solid and liquid; 
(b) length, if the commodity is sold by linear measure; 
(c) area, if the commodity is sold by area measure; 
(d) volume, if the commodity is liquid or is sold by cubic measure; or 
(e) number, if the commodity is sold by number: 
(3) Where the declaration of quantity has been  made in terms of mass, the manufacturer 
or importer, as the case may be, the packer  may, at his option make an additional 
declaration on the package as to the number of commodities contained in the package. 
(4) Where the declaration of quantity by weight  or measure or number is not sufficient to 
give to the consumer full information with  regard to the dimensions or number of 
commodity contained in the package, such  declaration shall be accompanied by a 
Page 12 of 43 

===== PAGE 13 =====

declaration of the di
mensions or number, or both, where necessary, of the commodity 
contained in the package. 
(5)Where it is necessary to communicate to  the consumer any additional information 
about the commodity contained in a package, such information shall also appear on the 
same panel in which the other informati on, as required by these rules, have been 
indicated. 
*(6) The declaration of quantity shall not contain any word or  expression which tends to 
create an exaggerated, misleading or inadequate impression as to the quantity of the 
commodity contained in the package, for exam ple, words or expressions like-'minimum', 
'not less than', 'average', 'about', approximately' or other words of a similar nature. 
(7) For packages having capacity 5 cubic cm or  less, the declaration of quantity shall be 
made on a tag, card, tape, or any other similar device affixed to the container in such a 
manner that it cannot be removed without opening the container and every such tag, card, 
tape or other device shall contain mark or in scription which will enable the consumer to 
identity the manufacturer or packer, as the case may be. 
* Provision will stand amended wef 01.07.2012 vide GSR 748(E) dated 24.10.2011. It 
will read “The declaration of quantity under these Rules shall not contain any word or 
expression of any sort, whatsoever, which tends to create or likely to create an 
exaggerated, misleading or inadequate expression as to the quantity of the commodity 
contained in the package. 
13. Statement of units of weight, measure or number.-  
(1) The units of weight or measure or numbe r shall be specified in  accordance with the 
units specified in sub-rule (2) or sub-rule (3), as the case may be. 
(2) When expressing a quantity less than,- 
(a) one kilogram, the unit of weight shall be the gram; 
(b) one metre, the unit of length shall be the centimetre; 
(c) one square metre, the unit of area shall be the square decimetre; 
(d) one cubic metre, the unit of volume shall be one cubic centimetre; 
(e) one cubic decimetre, the unit of volume shall be the cubic centimetre; 
(f) one litre, the unit of volume shall be the millilitre. 
(3) When expressing a quantity of equal to or more than- 
Page 13 of 43 

===== PAGE 14 =====

(a) one kilogram
, the unit of we ight shall be the kilogram an d any fraction of a kilogram 
shall be expressed in terms of decimal of sub-multiples of kilogram or in terms of grams; 
(b) one metre, the unit of length shall be th e metre and any fraction of a metre shall be 
expressed in terms of decimal of sub-multiples of the metre or in terms of centimetre; 
(c) square metre, the unit of the area shall be the square metre and any fraction of a 
square metre shall be expressed in terms of decimal of sub-multiple of the square metre. 
(d) cubic metre, the unit of volume shall be  the cubic metre and a ny fraction of a cubic 
metre shall be expressed in terms of decimal sub-multiple of the cubic metre; 
(e) one litre, the unit of volume shall be the litre and any fraction of a litre shall be 
expressed in terms of decimal of sub-multiple of the litre: 
Provided that where the quantity to be expressed is equal to one kilogram, one metre, one 
square metre, one cubic decimetre, one cubic metre or one litre, as the case may be, such 
quantity may be expressed at the option of the manufacturer or the packer on the 
importer, as the case may be, in terms of gram, centimetre, square decimetre, cubic 
centimetre, cubic decimetre or millilitre as the case may be. 
(4) No number called the dozen, score, gross, gr eat gross or the like shall be specified or 
indicated on any package. 
(5) (i) No system of units other than the Inte rnational System of Units shall be used in 
furnishing the net quantity of the packages and  
(ii) For items sold by number the symbol should be N or U.  
 
14. Declarations with regard to dimensions of certain commodities.-  
Where a package contains commodities like bed-sheets, hemmed fabric materials, 
dhoties, sarees, napkins, pillow-covers, towels, table cloths or similar other commodities, 
the number and the dimensions of finished size of such commodities shall also be 
declared on the package or on the label affixed thereto: 
Provided that where the package contains more than one piece of different dimensions, 
the package shall also contain a declaration as  to the dimensions and the retail sale price 
of each such piece: 
Provided further that the dimensions of the commodities and the sale price thereof shall 
also be marked on each individual piece. 
Page 14 of 43 

===== PAGE 15 =====

 
15. Declaration w
ith regard to dimensions and weight to be made on packages in 
certain cases.-  
Where the dimensions and weight, or combina tion thereof, of a commodity has or have a 
relationship to the price of that commodit y, the declaration of quantity on the package 
containing such commodity, sha ll also include a declarati on as to such dimensions, 
weight or combination. 
16. Declarations to be made with regard to the number of usable sheets to be stated.- 
In the case of a package containing sheets like aluminum foil, facial tissues, waxed paper, 
toilet paper or any other type  of sheet, the declaration of  quantity on the package shall 
also include a statement as to the number of  usable sheets contained in the package and 
the dimensions of each such sheet. 
17. Declarations with regard to the dimensions of container type commodities.--  
The commodities shall be expr essed as bags, boxes, cups, pans or the like designed and 
sold in retail trade for being used as containers for other materials or objects and shall be 
labeled with the declaration of quantity as follows.-- 
(i) for bag-type commodities, the number of bags which the package may contain, 
followed by linear dimensions of the bags, wh ether packaged in a perforated roll or 
otherwise; 
(ii) for square, oblong, rectangular or si milarly shaped containers, the number of 
containers which the package may contain, followed by length, width, and if required, 
depth of the container. 
(iii) for circular or generally round-shaped containers, not being cups or the like the 
number of commodities contained therein foll owed by diameter and, if necessary, depth 
of the container. 
(iv) when the use of a contai ner is related by label refere nces, the standard weight or 
measure, to the capability of the container to  hold a specific quantity of commodity or a 
class of commodities such references shall be included in the declaration of quantity. 
Page 15 of 43 

===== PAGE 16 =====

18. Provisions relating to wholesale dealer and retail dealers.- 
(1) No wholesale d
ealer or retail dealer or importer shall se ll, distribute, deliver, display 
or store for sale any commodity in the pack aged form unless the package complies with 
in all respects, the provisions of the Act and these rules. 
(2) No retail dealer or other person including manufacturer, packer, importer and 
wholesale dealer shall make any sale of any commodity in packed form at a price 
exceeding the retail sale price thereof. 
(3) Where, after any commodity has been pre- packed for sale, any tax payable in relation 
to such commodity is revised, the retail de aler or any other pers on shall not make any 
retail sale of such commodity  at a price exceeding the revised retail sale price, 
communicated to him by the manufacturer, or where the manufacturer is not the packer, 
the packer, and it shall be, the duty of the manu facturer or packer as the case may be, to 
indicate by not less than two advertisements  in one or more newspapers and also by 
circulation of notices to the dealers and to the Director in the Central Government and 
Controllers of Legal Metrology in  the States and Union Territories, the revised prices of 
such packages but the difference between the price marked on the package and the 
revised price shall not, in any case, be higher than the extent of increase in the tax or in 
the case of imposition of fresh tax higher than the fresh tax so imposed: 
Provided that publication in any newspaper, of such revised price shall not be necessary 
where such revision is due to any increase in, or imposition or, any tax payable under any 
law made by the State Legislation: 
Provided further that the retail dealer or other person, shall not charge such revised prices 
in relation to any packages except those p ackages which bear marking indicating that 
they were pre-packed in the month in which such tax has been revised or fresh tax has 
been imposed or in the month immediately following the month aforesaid; 
Provided also that where the revised prices are lower than the price marked on the 
package, the retail dealer or other person shall not charge any price in excess of the 
revised price, irrespective of the month in which the commodity was pre-packed. 
(4) Nothing in sub-rule (3) shall apply to  a package which is not required, under these 
rules to indicate the month and the year in which it was pre-packed. 
Page 16 of 43 

===== PAGE 17 =====

(5) No whol
esale dealer or retail dealer or  other person shall obliterate, smudge or alter 
the retail sale price, indicated by the manufact urer or the packer or the importer, as the 
case may be, on the package or on the label affixed thereto. 
(6) The manufacturer or packer or the impor ter shall not alter the price on the wrapper 
once printed and used for packing. 
(7)  All retailers who are c overed under the Value Added Tax VAT or Turn Over Tax 
(TOT) and dealing in packaged commodities w hose net content declaration is by weight 
or volume or a combination thereof shall maintain a electronic weighing machine of at 
least accuracy class III, with smallest division  of at least 1 g, with facility to issue a 
printed receipt indicating among other things, the gross quantity, price and the like at a 
prominent place in their retail premises, free of  cost, for the benefit of consumers and the 
consumers may check the weight of their packaged commodities purchased from the shop 
on such machine. 
19. Inspection of quantity and error in packages at the premises of the 
manufacturer or packer.— 
(1) With a view to ascertaining whether any package or lot of packages complies with 
provisions of these rules in all respects, the Director, C ontroller or any Legal Metrology 
Officer empowered to inspect under section 15  of the Act (hereafter referred to as in 
these rules as the “authorized person”)  may examine the packages and carry out the tests 
at the premises of the manufacturer or wher e the manufacturer is not the packer, of the 
packer and when he carries out such examination or tests, he shall draw samples from 
such lot of packages, in such manner and in  such number as are specified in the Fifth 
Schedule and the tests aforesaid shall be ca rried out in accordance with the method 
specified in the Sixth Schedule. 
(2) The Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer shall enter in the Form set 
out in the Seventh Schedule, the detailed results of the tests carried out by him under sub-
rule (1) and shall obtain, on the said Form, the signature of the manufacturer or, as the 
case may be, of the packer, or his authorized agent, or, in the absence of both, or on their 
refusal to affix such signature, the signature  of a competent witness and copy of the data 
sheet containing the result shall be given to the manufacturer or packer, as the case may 
be. 
Page 17 of 43 

===== PAGE 18 =====

(3) On the com
pletion of the examination and tests carried out under sub-ru le (1), the 
Director, Controller or a ny Legal Metrology Officer shall make a report indicating 
therein his findings with regard  to the declarations  required to be made under these rules 
and as to the net quantity actually contained in the sample packages and the extent of 
error, if any, noticed by him and furnish a copy of such report to the manufacturer or the 
packer, as the case may be. 
(4) If it appears from the report referred to in sub-rule (3) that- 
(a) the statistical average of the net quantity contained in the packages drawn as samples 
is lesser than the quantity declared on the packages or on the labels affixed thereto; or 
(b) any such package shows an error in deficiency greater than the maximum permissible 
error, the Director, Controller or any Le gal Metrology Officer shall, if for good and 
sufficient reason, requested by the manufacturer or  packer or his authorized agent, so to 
do, take out as soon as may be practicable, fresh samples and carry out fresh tests in 
accordance with the provisions of these rules and where fresh tests are made, the 
Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer, as the case may be, shall collect a 
fee of rupees two thousand five hundred for carrying out fresh test.  
Provided that where fres h tests are carried out, no packag e contained in the lot, which 
was previously tested under this rule, shall be  sold or distributed by the manufacturer or 
packer, as the case may be, unless the provision s of the sub-rule (5 ) or as the case may 
be, sub-rule (6), are complied with. 
(5)(a) where, as a result of any test carried out under this rule, it is found that any package 
contained in the lot does not conform to all or any of the provisions of the Act or of these 
rules, the manufacturer or the packer shall make a cent per cent check of the packages 
contained in the lot and pick out from the lot the packages which conform to all the 
provisions of the Act and of these rules. 
(b) When the Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer is satisfied that the 
packages picked out by the manufacturer or pa cker conforms to all the provisions of the 
Act and of these rules, he shall authorize the sale, distribution or delivery of such 
packages. 
(c) Where, as a result of such cent per cent check by the manufacturer or packer, any 
package is found to be not conforming to all or  any or of the provisi ons of the Act or of 
Page 18 of 43 

===== PAGE 19 =====

these rules, such pack
age shall not be sold, di stributed or delivered until it has been re-
packed, re-processed or relabeled, as the case may be, in accordance with the provisions 
of the Act and of these rules. 
(6) A lot of packages shall be approved for sa le if, and only if, as a result of the tests 
carried out under this rule, it is found that-  
(a) the statistical average of the net quantity c ontained in the sample packages is equal to, 
or more than, the quantity declared on the package or on the label affixed thereto. 
(b) the extent of error in deficiency in none of such sample packages exceeds the 
maximum permissible error.  
(c) each such package bears thereon or on a label affixed thereto- the declarations 
required to be made under these rules. 
(7) The requirement of mandatory declarations on the packages shall be ensured either at 
the factory level or at the depot of the factory.  
(8) For non-compliance of the provisions of th is rule, action may be taken after seizing 
five representative samples of the packages as  evidence and the rest  of the packages may 
be released *(once compliance is ensured) by the ma nufacturer or the packer, as the case 
may be. 
* Provision will stand amended wef 01.07.2012 vide GSR 748(E) dated 24.10.2011. The 
words within parenthesis will be replaced by “only after the compliance is completed”. 
20. Action to be taken on completion of inspection of packages at the premises of the 
manufacturer or the packer.- 
(1) If it appears from the report referred to in sub-rule (3) of rule 19 that,- 
(a) the statistical average of the net quantity contained in the packages drawn as samples 
under that rule is lesser than the quantity declared on the packages or on the labels affixed 
thereto, or any such package shows an erro r in deficiency greater than the maximum 
permissible error, or 
(b) any such package does not bear thereon or on label affixed thereto the declarations to 
be made under these rules, the Director, C ontroller or any Legal Metrology Officer shall 
take action the following action, namely:- 
Page 19 of 43 

===== PAGE 20 =====

(i) seize the packages drawn by hi
m as samples and shall take adequate steps for the safe 
custody of the seized packages  until they are produced in  the appropriate court as 
evidence; 
(ii) based on the evidence initiate action for violations of the provisions of the Act and 
these rules: 
Provided that no such action shall be taken if fresh tests are carried out under sub-rule (4) 
of rule 19, but if after such fresh tests any such  error or omission as is referred to in this 
sub-rule is detected, the Director, Controll er or any Legal Metrol ogy Officer shall take 
appropriate action as specified in this sub-rule in accordance with the provisions of the 
Act against the manufacturer or, as the case may be, the packer. 
 
(2) The disposal of the seized packages sh all be made in accordance with the provisions 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974). 
 
21. Inspection of quantity and error in packages at the premises of the wholesale 
dealer or retail dealer  
(1) Ordinarily, any test in relation to the net quantity contained in a package shall not be 
carried out at the premises of the retail dealer or the wholesale dealer, unless-  
(i) a complaint is received by the Director or  the  Controller or any Legal Metrology 
Officer to the effect that the package sold  or delivered to the complainant does not 
contain the quantity declared on such package or on the label affixed thereto; 
(ii) the Director or the  C ontroller or any Legal Metrology Officer has reason to suspect 
that any package has been tampered with or that there has been any pilferage or leakage 
of the commodity contained in the packages 
(iii) the Director or the  C ontroller or any Legal Metrology  Officer and any package, or 
any label affixed thereto, does not bear thereo n all or any of the declarations which are 
required to be made under these rules. 
(2) Where any test is carried out in pursuan ce of the provisions of sub-rule (1), the 
Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer shall ve rify whether the quantity 
contained in the package corresponds to the quantity declared on such packages or any 
label affixed thereto and where quantity cont ained in package is less than the declared 
Page 20 of 43 

===== PAGE 21 =====

quantity, whether the deficiency is more than the m
aximum permissible error in relation 
to that commodity. 
(3) Where the Director, Controller or any Le gal Metrology Officer finds on a test carried 
out under this rule that the e rror in deficiency in any pack age kept or stored for sale, 
distribution or delivery at  the premises of the retail or w holesale dealer is more than the 
maximum permissible error in relation to that commodity, he shall seize such package 
and take appropriate action against the retail dealer or the wholesale dealer, as the case 
may be, in accordance with the provisions of the Act: 
Provided that where the package bears the legend 'when packed', no punitive action shall 
be taken against the retail deal er or wholesale dealer if th e Director, Controller or any 
Legal Metrology Officer is satisfied after nece ssary test that the deficiency in the net 
quantity contained in package is due to environmental conditions. 
(4) Where as a result of any test made under this rule, it is found that the net quantity 
contained in the package conforms to the declared quantity or where there is a deficiency, 
such deficiency is not more than the maximum permissible error, the retail dealer shall be 
at liberty to sell or deliver or distribute such commodity at the price determined on the 
basis of the quantity found on such tests. 
(5)Where, as a result of any test made under th is rule, it is found that any package, or any 
label affixed thereto, does not bear thereon all or any of the declara tions required to be 
made under these rules, it shall be lawful for the Director, Controller or any Legal 
Metrology Officer to make such enquiries as to the source from which such package was 
received by the whole sale dealer  or the retail dealer as the case may be, as he may think 
fit. 
 
22. Establishment of maximum permissible error on package.- 
(1) The maximum permissible error in relation  to the commodities shall be such as is 
indicated in the First Schedule. 
(2) While establishing the maximum permissibl e error in relation to the net quantity of 
commodities contained in packages, due account shall be taken of the following causes 
which may lead to variation in quantity, namely:- 
Page 21 of 43 

===== PAGE 22 =====

(a) variations caused by unavoidable deviati on in weighing, m
easuring or counting the 
contents of individual packages that may occur in good packaging practice; 
(b) variations caused by the ordinary and customary exposure to conditions, such as, 
climate, transport, storage or the like th at normally occur in good distribution practice 
after the commodity is introduced in trade or commerce; and  
(c) variations due to the nature of packaging material or container. 
(3) The Director or Controller or the Legal Metrology officer shall determine, or cause to 
be determined, in relation to any commodity, the declaration in respect of the net quantity 
of which is permitted to be qualified by the words 'when packed'; the reasonable 
variations which may take place by reason of the environmental conditions. 
 
23. Deceptive packages to be repacked or in default to be seized.- 
(1) If, on the determination of the quantity contained in the sample packages, the Director 
or Controller or the Legal Metrology officer finds that th e quantity contained in the 
package agrees with the declar ation of the quantity made on the package or label thereon 
but the package is a deceptive package, he sh all require the manufacturer or the packer, 
as the case may be, to repack and re-label su ch package and in the event of the omission 
or failure on the part of the manufacturer or the packer, as the case may be, to repack or 
re-label such deceptive package, in accordance with the standards established by or under 
these rules, seize them, take appropriate punitive action in accordan ce with the Act and 
take adequate steps for the safe custody of such packages until they are produced in a 
court as evidence. 
Explanation: For the purpose of this rule, 'd eceptive package' means a package which is 
so designed as to deliberately given to th e consumer an exaggerated or misleading 
impression as to the quantity of the comm odity contained therein, except where bigger 
dimensions of the package can be justified by the manufacturer or the packer, as the case 
may be, on the ground that such dimensions are necessary for giving protection to the 
commodity contained in such package or fo r meeting the requirements of the machine 
used for filling such package. 
Page 22 of 43 

===== PAGE 23 =====

(2) If the seized p
ackages contain any commodity which is subject to speedy or natural 
decay, the Director or Contro ller or the Legal Metrology o fficer shall dispose of the 
commodity in accordance with the rules made under the Act. 
 
CHAPTER III 
PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO WHOLESALE PACKAGES 
 
24. Declarations applicable to be made on every wholesale package 
Every wholesale package shall bear thereon a legible, definite, plain and conspicuous 
declaration as to – 
(a) The name and address of the manufacturer or importer or where the manufacturer or 
importer is not the packer, of the packer; 
(b) the identity of the commodity contained in the package; and 
(c ) the total number of retail package contai ned in such wholesale package or the net 
quantity in terms of standard units of wei ghts, measures or number of the commodity 
contained in wholesale package; 
Provided that nothing in this rule shall a pply in relation to a wholesale package if a 
declaration similar to the declarations specified in this rule, is required to be made on 
such wholesale packages by or under any other law for the time being in force. 
 
CHAPTER IV 
EXPORT AND IMPORT OF PACKAGED COMMODITIES 
 
25. Restrictions on sale of export packages in India.-  
An export package shall not be sold in India unless the manufacturer or packer has re-
packed or relabeled the commodity in accordance with the provisions contained in 
Chapter II, and where any export package is so ld in India without such re-packing or re-
labeling, such package shall be liable to be seized in accordance wi th the provisions of 
the Act. 
 
CHAPTER V 
Page 23 of 43 

===== PAGE 24 =====

EXEMPTIONS 
 
26. Exemption in respect of certain packages.- 
Nothing con
tained in these rules shall apply to any package containing a commodity if— 
(a) the net weight or measure of the commodity is ten gram or ten milli litre or less, if 
sold by weight or measure; 
*Provided that the declaration in respect of maximum retail price and net quantity shall 
be declared on packages containing 10g to 20g or 10ml to 20ml. 
(b) any package containing fast food items packed by restaurant or hotel and the like; 
(c) it contains scheduled formulations and non-scheduled formulations covered under the 
Drugs (Price Control) Order,1995 made under section 3 of the Essential Commodities 
Act, 1955 (10 of 1955)'; 
(d) agricultural form produces in packages of above 50 kg'. 
* Provisio will stand withdrawn wef 01.07.2012 vide GSR 748(E) dated 24.10.2011 
CHAPTER VI 
REGISTRATION OF MANUFACTURERS AND PACKERS 
 
27. Registration of manufacturers, packers and importers.- 
(1) Every individual, firm, Hindu undivided family, society, company or corporation who 
or which pre-packs or imports any commodity  for sale, distribution or delivery shall 
make an application, accompanied by a fee of r upees five hundred, to the Director or the 
Controller for the registration of his or its name and complete address; and every such 
application shall be made,- 
(i) in the case of an applicant pre-pa cking or importing any commodity at the 
commencement of these rules, within ninety days from such commencement; or 
(ii) in the case of any applicant who or which commences pre-pa cking or importing of 
any commodity after the commencement of these rules, within ninety  days from the date 
on which he or it commences such pre-packing. 
(2) Every application referred in sub-rule (1 ) shall contain the fo llowing particulars, 
namely:- 
(a) the name of the applicant; 
Page 24 of 43 

===== PAGE 25 =====

(b) the com
plete address of the premises at  which the pre-packing or import of one or 
more commodities is made by the applicant; and 
(c) the name of the commodity or commodities pre-packed or imported by the applicant. 
Explanation: In this sub-rule, 'complete address' has the meaning assigned to it in the 
explanation to sub-rule (1) of rule 10.' 
(3) For making any alteration in the registration certificate issued under sub rule (1), a fee 
of rupees one hundred shall be paid by the c oncerned manufacturer or packer or importer 
to the Director or Controller. 
(4) On receipt of the application made under s ub-rule (1), the Director or Controller, who 
shall be the Registering Authority, shall- 
(a) if the application is not complete in al l respects, return the same to the applicant 
within a period of seven working days from the date of receipt of the application; 
(b) if the application is complete in all respects, register the applicant and grant a 
registration certificate to the applicant to that effect. 
 
 28.  Registration of shorter address permissible.- 
(1) It shall be lawful for any manufacturer or packer to make an application to the 
Director or the Controller for the registration of a shorter address, in addition to the 
complete address referred to in sub-rule (2) of rule 27. 
(2) The Director or the Controller may, if he  is satisfied after inquiry that the shorter 
address is sufficient to enable the consum er or any other person to identify the 
manufacturer or the packer, register such shorter address. 
(3) Where a shorter address is registered by the Director or the C ontroller, it shall be 
lawful for the manufacturer or packer to st ate such shorter addre ss on the label of each 
commodity pre-packed by him or it. 
 
29. Registration of manufacturers and packers, etc.- 
(1) The Director or the Controller shall enter in a register, to be maintained by him for the 
purpose, the name and complete address of each manufacturer or packer by whom 
application for such registration has been made to him under rule 27. 
Page 25 of 43 

===== PAGE 26 =====

(2)The regis
ter referred to in sub-rule (1) shall be open to the in spection of the public 
without payment of any fee. 
 
30. Compilation of lists of manufacturers or packers and their circulation. –  
The Director or the Controller shall compile a State-wise list of the manufacturers and 
packers registered by him under rule 29 and shal l circulate such list to the Controller of 
the concerned State to enable the Controller to  take, or cause to be taken, samples at the 
premises of the manufacturer or, where the manufacturer is not the packer, of the packer. 
 
CHAPTER VII-GENERAL 
31. (1) Any advertisement mentioning the re tail sale price of the pre-packaged 
commodity shall contain a declaration as to the net quantity or number of the commodity 
contained in the package.  
(2)The font size of the net quantity in the advertisement shall be same as that of retail sale 
price.    
 
32. Penalty for contravention of Rules 
(1) Whoever contravenes the provisions of rule s 27 to 31, he shall be punished with fine 
of four thousand rupees. 
(2) Whoever contravenes any other provision of these rules, for the contravention of 
which no punishment has been provided either  in the Act or in the rules he shall be 
punished with fine of two thousand rupees. 
 
33. Power to relax:  
The Central Government may, after ascertain ing the genuineness of the compounding of 
a case or Court decision stated in the application, permit a manufacturer or packer to pack 
for sale the packages for a reasonable period by relaxing one or more provision of these 
Rules with such corrective measures as may be specified.  
 
34. Repeal and savings.-  
Page 26 of 43 

===== PAGE 27 =====

(1) The Standards of Weights and Measures (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 1977 are 
hereby repealed. 
Provided that such repeal shall no
t affect: 
(a) the previous operations of the said rules or anything done or omitted to be done or 
suffered therein; or 
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under the said 
rules; or 
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incu rred in respect of any offence committed 
against the said rules; or 
(d) any investigation, legal proc eedings or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid. 
And any such investigation, legal proceedings or remedy may be instituted, continued or 
enforced and any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if the said 
rules had not been rescinded. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken or purported to have 
been done or taken including approval of le tter, exemption granted, fees collected, any 
adjudication, enquiry or i nvestigation commenced, license and registration of 
manufacturers, dealers, impor ters of pre-packaged commodities, or show cause notice, 
decision, determination, approval, authorization issued, given or done under the said rules 
shall if in force at the commencement of the said rules continue to be in force and have 
effect as if issued, given or done under the corresponding provisions of these rules.  
 (3) The provisions of these rules shall apply to any appl ication made to the Central 
Government or as the case may be the State Government under the said rules for licence, 
registration of manufacturers, importers, dealers of pre-packaged commodities pending at 
the commencement of these rules and to any proceedings consequent thereon and to any 
registration granted in pursuance thereof.  
(4) Any legal proceeding pending in any court under the said rules at the commencement 
of these rules may be continued in that court as if these rules had not been framed.  
(5) Any appeal preferred to the Central G overnment or as the case may be the State 
Government under the said rules and pending shall be deemed to have been made under 
the corresponding provisions of these rules. 
Page 27 of 43 

===== PAGE 28 =====

THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See Rule 2(e)] 
 
1. Maximu
m permissible errors on net quantity declared by weight or volume.- 
(1) The maximum permissible error, in exces s or in deficiency, in the net quantity by 
weight or volume of any commodity shall be as specified in Table I below:- 
 
TABLE-I 
Maximum permissible errors on net quantities declared by weight or by volume 
 
Sl. No. Declared quantity 
g or ml 
Maximum permissible error in excess or in deficiency 
  As percentage of declared 
quantity 
g or ml 
(i) up to 50 9 - 
(ii) 50 to 100 - 4.5 
(iii) 100 to 200 4.5 - 
(iv) 200 to 300 - 9 
(v) 300 to 500 3 - 
(vi) 500 to 1000 - 15 
(vii) 1000 to 10000 1.5 - 
(viii) 10000 to 15000 - 150 
(ix) More than 15000 1.0 - 
 
 
 (2) The maximum permissible error specified as percentage shall be rounded off to the 
nearest one-tenth of a g or ml, for a declared quantities less than or equal to 1000 g or ml 
and to the next whole g or ml for declared quantities above 1000 g or ml. 
 
Page 28 of 43 

===== PAGE 29 =====

2. The m
aximum permissible errors on net qua ntity declared by length, area or number. - 
(1) The maximum permissible error, in excess or in deficiency, in the net quantity 
declared in terms of length, area or number of any commodity not specified in the First 
Schedule shall be as specified in Table II below:- 
 
TABLE -II 
The maximum permissible errors on net quantities declared by length, area or number 
 
Sl. No. Quantity Declared Maximum permissible error in excess or in deficiency 
(i) in units of length 2% of declared quantity up to 10 metre and thereafter 1% of declared 
quantity. 
(ii) in units of area 4% of declared quantity up to 10 sq. metre and thereafter 1% of declared 
quantity. 
(iii) by number 2% of declared quantity. 
 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See rule 5) 
 
Commodities to be packed in specified quantities 
The following commodities shall be packed in such quantities by weight, measure or 
number as are specified in the corresponding entries against them. 
 
Sl. No. Commodities Quantities in which to be packed   
1. 2. 3.   
1. Baby food 
100g, 200g, 300g, 400g, 500g, 
600,g, 700 g, 800 g, 900g, 1 kg, 
2kg, 5 kg and 10 kg. 
 
Page 29 of 43 

===== PAGE 30 =====

Weaning food. 
100g, 200g, 300g, 400g, 500g, 
600g, 700g, 800g, 900g, 1 kg, 2 kg, 
5 kg and 10 kg. 
 2. 
Biscuits 
25g, 50g, 75g, 100g, 150g, 200g, 250g, 300g and thereafter in multiples 
of 100g up to 1 kg. 
3. 
Bread including brown 
bread but excluding 
bun. 
100g and there after in of multiples 100g. 4. 
Un-canned packages 
of butter and 
margarine 
25 g, 50 g, 100 g, 200 g, 500 g, 1 kg, 2 kg, 5 kg, and thereafter in 
multiples of 5 kg. 
5. 
6. Cereals and Pulses 100g, 200g, 500g, 1 kg, 2 kg, 5 kg and thereafter multiples of 5 kg  
7. Coffee 25g, 50g, 100g, 200g, 250g, 500g, 1kg and thereafter in multiples of 1kg. 
8. Tea 25g, 50g, 100g, 125g 250g, 500g, 1kg and thereafter in multiples of 1kg. 
Materials which may 
be constituted or 
reconstituted as 
beverages. 
25 g, 50 g, 100 g, 200 g, 500 g, 1 kg and thereafter in multiples of 1 kg. 9. 
10 
Edible Oils Vanaspati, 
ghee, butter oil 
50 g, 100 g, 200 g, 500 g, 1 kg, 2 kg, 3 kg, 5 kg and thereafter in 
multiples of 5 kg If net quantity is declared by volume the same number 
in milliliters or liters, as the case may be. If the net quantity is declared 
by volume, then the equivalent quantity in terms of mass to be declared 
Page 30 of 43 

===== PAGE 31 =====

in brackets in same size of letters/ numerals 
Milk Powder. 
Below 50g no restriction, 50 g, 100g, 200g, 500 g, 1 kg and thereafter in 
multiples of 500 g. 
11. 
Non-soapy detergents 
(powder) 
Below 50 g no restriction, 50g, 100g, 200g, 500g, 
700g, 1kg, 1.5 kg, 2 kg and thereafter, in multiples 
of 1 kg.  
12. 
Rice(powdered), flour, 
atta, rawa  
and suji. 
100g, 200g, 500g, 1kg, 2kg, 5 kg and 
thereafter in multiples of 5 kg. 
13. 
Salt 
Below 50g in multiples of 10g, 50g, 100g, 200g, 500g, 750g, 1 kg, 2 kg, 
5 kg and thereafter in multiples of 5 kg. 
14. 
15. Soaps    
(a) Laundry Soap 50g, 75g, 100g, and thereafter in multiples of 50g.   
(b) Non-soapy 
detergent cakes/ bars. 
50g, 75g, 100g, 125g, 150g, 200g, 250g, 300g and thereafter in multiples 
of 100g  
  
(c) Toilet Soap 
including all kinds of 
bath soap (cakes).  
25g, 50g, 75g, 100g, 125g, 150g and thereafter in multiples of 50g.   
16. 
  
  
Aerated soft drinks, 
non-alcoholic 
beverages.  
65 ml (fruit based drinks only), 100 ml, 125ml(fruit based drinks only), 
150 ml, 200 ml, 250 ml, 300 ml, 330ml(in cans only), 500 ml, 750 ml, 1 
litre, 1.5 litre, 2 litre, 3 litre, 4 litre and 5 litre. 
Page 31 of 43 

===== PAGE 32 =====

17. 
 
Mineral water and 
drinking water 
100 ml, 150 ml, 200 ml, 250 ml, 300 ml, 500 ml, 750 ml, 1 litre, 1.5 litre, 
2 litre, 3 litre, 4 litre and 5 litre.  
Cement in bags. 
1 kg, 2 kg, 5 kg, 10 kg, 20 kg, 25 kg, 40 kg (for White cement only) and 
50 kg. 
 
18. 
19. Paint varnish etc.    
(a) Paint (other than 
paste paint or solid 
paint) varnish, varnish 
stains, enamels. 
50 ml, 100 ml, 200 ml, 500 ml, 1 litre, 2 litre, 3 litre, 4 litre, 5 litre and 
thereafter in multiples of 5 litre.    
(b) Paste paint and 
solid paint 
500g, 1 kg, 1.5 kg, 2 kg, 3 kg, 5 kg, 7kg and thereafter multiple of 5 kg.   
(c) Base paint: 
 
450 ml, 500 ml, 900 ml, 925 ml, 950 ml, 975 ml, 1 litre, 3.6 litre, 3.7 
litre, 3.8 litre, 3.9 litre and 4 litre and no restriction above 4 litre.' 
  
 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
(See Rule 11(4)) 
Declaration of quantity in relation to commodities (sold by weight or volume) which may be qualified by the words 
“When packed”   
     Sl. No.                                        Name of commodity 
1.    All kinds of Soaps 
2.    Lotions 
       3.                                             Cream (other than cream of milk) 
Page 32 of 43 

===== PAGE 33 =====

THE FOURTH SCHEDULE 
(See Rule 1
2(2)) 
Exceptions referred to in Rule 12(2) 
1. The following commodities in packaged form may be sold by weight, measure or 
number as shown against the commodity:- 
TABLE 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Sl.                  Commodity                                                                   Whether declaration to be expressed in terms   
No.                                                                                            of weight, measures or number or  two or more of 
them 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
1.                        2.                                                                                                 3. 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
1.                  Aerosol Products                                                                                Weight 
2.                  Acids in liquid form                                                                            Weight or volume 
3.                 Compressed or liquefied                                                                      Weight and equivalent volume 
                    gas (but not liquefied petroleum gas)                                                 at stated temperature and pressure 
4.                 Curd                                                                                                  Weight 
5.                 Electric Cables                                                                                    Length or weight 
6.                 Electric wire                                                                                        Length or weight 
7.                 Fencing wire                                                                                       Number or weight 
8.                 Fruits, all kinds                                                                                    Number or weight 
9.                 Furnace oil                                                                                          Weight or volume 
10.               Non edible vegetable oil                                                                        Weight or volume 
11.               Edible oil, Vanaspati                                                                             Weight or volume 
                   ghee and butter oil 
12.              Heavy residual fuel oil                                                                            Weight 
13.              Industrial diesel fuel                                                                               Volume 
14.             Honey, malt-extract,                                                                                Weight 
                 golden syrup treacle  
Page 33 of 43 

===== PAGE 34 =====

15.            Ice cream and other                                                                                * Volume 
                similar frozen products   
16.           Liquid chemicals                                                                                       Weight or volume 
17.           Liquefied petroleum gas                                                                            Weight 
18.           Nails, wood screws                                                                                    Number or weight 
19.           Paints other than paste                                                                              Volume  
               paint or solid paint) Varnish 
               varnish stains, enamels 
20.         Paste paint, solid paint                                                                                 Weight 
21.         Rasgulla, Gulabjamun                                                                                  Weight 
             and other sweet preparations  
22.         Ready-made garments                                                                                  Number 
23.         Sauces, all kinds                                                                                           Weight 
24.          Tyres and tubes                                                                                           Number 
25.         Yarn                                                                                                           Weight or length of yarn. 
26.        Cosmetics including                                                                                        Weight or measure 
           creams, shampoo, lotions and perfumes  
* Provision will stand amended wef 01.07.2012 vide GSR 748(E) dated 24.10.2011. 
Volume will be replaced by Weight. 
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE 
(See Rule 19) 
 
Manner of Selection of Sample Packages 
1. For determination of the net quantity for any commodity contained in a package, the 
sample size shall be such as is specified in the corresponding entry column 2 of the Table 
below against the lot size specified in Column 1 of the said Table. 
Page 34 of 43 

===== PAGE 35 =====

TABLE 
 
Lot Size Sample Size 
(1) (2) 
Less than 4000 32 
More than 4000 80 
 
2. The sample shall be selected at random in accordance with the manner specified in 
paragraphs 3 and 4. 
3. Where, for the determination of the net quantity of any commodity contained in a 
package it is necessary to take samples of p ackages stored by the manufacture or packer 
in a ware house, go-down or at any other place,  the sample shall be selected at random, 
from ever lot of packages and shall be picked  out from the top, bottom, center, right, left, 
front and rear of the stocks so that the samp les may adequately represent the packages in 
the lot. 
4. Where, for the determination of the net quantity of any commodity contained in a 
package it is necessary to take samples form  the place where the package is being filled 
such samples shall be selected from among the package which have already been filled, 
or in the alternatively, the requisite number  of empty containers may be taken over and 
each of them shall be adequately marked for proper identification and the tare weight of 
each container shall be accurate ly noted and thereafter the marked containers shall be 
introduced at random in the packing process so that, after the packages  are filled in may 
be possible to determine the net quantity 
Explanation: In this schedule 'Sample size' means the umber of packages to be selected as 
sample. 
Page 35 of 43 

===== PAGE 36 =====

THE SIXTH SCHEDULE 
(See Rule 1
9) 
Determination of the Net Quantity of Commodities in Packages 
Part-I – Equipment 
 
1. Equipments required-  
(1) The Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer authorized by or under the 
Act, to determine the net quantity; of commodi ty  contained  in any package, shall be  
provided  by  the concerned  Government with  adequate equipments and facilities  to 
carry  out  his  work to the required degree of   accuracy  in  an Expedient and efficient 
manner. 
(2) The equipments, referred to in sub-paragrap h (1), shall ordinarily consist of working 
standard weights and balances, or any other weight or meas ure declared by the Director 
to be suitable for determining the net quantity contained in the concerned package. 
(3) The Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer shall, before determining the 
net quantity contained in any package, ensure that the working standards and other 
equipments are functioning properly. 
 
2. Working standards to be ordi narily used.-(1)  Ordinaril y, working standards and other 
weights and measures, duly  verified  shall be used for determining the net quantities  
contained in packages and the errors, if any, in relation to the net  quantity declared on 
the package. 
Provided that, where it is necessary to use the weights and measures, owned or controlled 
by the manufacturer, packer or wholesale deal er as the case may be such weights and 
measures, shall be used unless the maximu m permissible error of such weights and 
measures is twenty per cent or less of th e maximum error permitted n relation to the net 
quantity of the commodity contained in the packages.  
(2) It shall be the duty of every manufacturer , packer or wholesale dealer to render such 
assistance the Director, Contro ller or any Legal Metrology Officer as the Director or 
other authorized person may require in orde r carrying out his dutie s expeditiously and 
efficiently. 
Page 36 of 43 

===== PAGE 37 =====

(3) W
here any weight, measure or other equipment, owned or controlled by the 
manufacturer, packer or wholesale dealer is used by the Director, Controller or any Legal 
Metrology Officer for the determination or th e net quantity contained in any package, 
such weight, measure or other equipment sha ll not be released by the Director or other 
authorized person until his work is completed. 
 
Part-II - Instructions with regard to the determination of quantity and error at 
manufacturer's or packer's premises. 
 
3. (1) If empty tare packages are available, one such package shall be taken and tare 
package weight determined.  If the tare pack age weight is equal to or less than three-
tenths of the maximum permissible error for the concerned commodity of that quantity, it 
shall be assumed that the tare package weight so determined is valid for all the other 
packages in the sample, and the sample packag es shall then be weighed for gross weight, 
and thereafter the net weight of commodity c ontained in each package shall be obtained 
by subtracting the tare package weight from the gross package weight. If the tare package 
weight so determined is more than three tenths of the maximum permissible error in 
relation to the commodity for that quantity, wei ght of four emptier tare packages shall be 
determined. If the difference between the maximum tare package weight and the 
minimum tare package weight of the five sample s is equal to or less than four tenths of 
the maximum permissible error allowed for th at commodity for that quantity, the tare 
weight of the package shall be taken as equal to the average of the five tare package 
weights. The gross weight of the package in the sample shall then be determined and the 
average tare package weight sh all be subtracted from the gr oss package weight to obtain 
the net contents of the commodity in each pa ckage, in the sample. However, when the 
difference in the five individual tare weights of the packages exc eeds the limit of four 
tenths of the maximum permissible error spec ified above, the procedure specified in sub-
paragraph (4) or sub-paragraph (5), as the case may be, sha ll be adopted for determining 
the net quantity of individual packages. 
(2) In the absence of empty tare packages, one package from the sample shall be opened 
and the net weight of the commodity and the tare weight of the package determined. If 
Page 37 of 43 

===== PAGE 38 =====

the tare weight of the pack age is equal to o
r less than  three-tenth of the maximum 
permissible error for that concerned commodity of that quantity, it shall be assumed that 
the tare weight of one package so determined  is valid for all the other packages in the 
sample, and the remaining packages shall then be weighed for gross weight, and 
thereafter the net weight of commodity c ontained in each package shall be obtained by 
subtracting the tare weight from the gross weight. 
(3) If the tare weight of the package specified in  sub-paragraph  (2) is more than  three-
tenths  of  the maximum  permissible  error in relation to that  co mmodity,  four more  
packages in the samples shall be opened and the net  weight of  the commodity in each 
package as well as the tare  weight  of each package shall be determined. If the difference 
between the maximum tare weight and the mini mum tare weight of five samples is equal 
to or less than four-tenths of the maximum permissible error for that commodity of that 
quantity, the tare weight of the package shall be taken as equal to the arithmetic mean of 
the five tare weights.  The gross weight of the packages in the sample shall then be 
determined to the requisite accuracy and the average tare weight of the contained shall be 
subtracted from the gross weight to obtain the net contents of the commodity in each 
package in the sample. 
 (4) Where it is found on examining the first package, as described in sub-paragraph (2) 
that the tare weight of the container exceeds the limits specified in sub-paragraph (2) and 
sub-paragraph  (3) and the de termination of net contents, cannot be carried out without 
opening the remaining packages, or it is not, possible to use the procedure to use the 
procedure described  in sub-paragraph (5) the si ze of the sample to be examined shall  be 
restricted  to that indicated in column (2 ) , in accordance  with the lot indicated in 
column(1) of Table of the Fifth Schedule and  the  determination of net quantity shall be 
carried  out  by opening all the packages in the sample. 
(5) Where it is likely that the process of determination of the act ual net quantity may be 
destructive and it is possible to feed empty package into the packing process without 
affecting the results, the following procedure shall be used: 
(a) the number of empty packages, depending upon the size of the lot, in accordance with 
columns (1) and (2) of Table of the Fifth Schedule shall be selected; 
(b) the empty package shall be marked suitably to identify  them from the other packages; 
Page 38 of 43 

===== PAGE 39 =====

(c) th
e weight of each empty package, with its other parts  which are to be fitted on it 
after it is filled shall be determined and the weight suitably recorded on the empty 
package and also on the Form specified in the Seventh Schedule; 
(d) the  empty package shall then be filled by introducing  them in a random manner in 
the packing process, and such  introduction shal l  be adequately spread over the duration 
in accordance  with which ;the size of the lot is determined; 
(e) the  marked packages shall be taken out after completion  of the  filling and sealing 
operations and each such filled  package shall be weighed again to the requisite accuracy; 
(f) the net quantity shall be obtained by deducting  the  ta re weight  determined in 
accordance with clause (c) from  the  gross weight. 
(6) The Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer shal l enter  results of  this 
examination of gross weight, net weight and ta re  weight in  the Form specified in the 
Eleventh Schedule along  with  such other  obs ervation  as he may wish to make on the  
basis  of  his examination. 
 
4. Determination of liquid contents by volume.-(1) If the  specific gravity of the liquid 
commodity filled in packages  remains sufficiently constant for a lot and it is possible to 
determine accurately  its specific gravity the method of  determination  of net contents by 
weight, described in paragraph 3 may be used. 
(2) If the method described in sub-paragraph (1 ) is not feasible the containers shall be 
opened and the contents of each package po ured out carefully into the appropriate 
volume measure. 
(3) The reading of the actual net volume of  the commodity in every package shall be 
noted carefully and recorded in the Form specified in the Seventh Schedule. 
 
5. Verification of length of co mmodities.-(1) The sample shall be selected in the manner 
specified in the Fifth Schedule. 
(2) If it is not possible to measure the di mensions with out opening the package, the 
package shall be opened. 
(3) The length of the commodity shall be measured by means of a calib rated steel tape of 
suitable length. 
Page 39 of 43 

===== PAGE 40 =====

(4) If
 the actual length of the commodity is so great that it is not  possible to measure it 
with the tape measure and a  suitable length  measuring instrument is available on the  
premises,  that instrument  shall be use, after duly calibrating it  by  suitable means,  with  
the  steel tape serving  ala  working  standard  of length. 
(5)  The reading of the actua l length of the commodity in every package shall be noted 
carefully and recorded in the Form specified in the Seventh Schedule. 
(6) Verification of commodities packed by number. The Director, Controller or any Legal 
Metrology Officer shall take packages from  the sample drawn by him in the manner 
specified in the Fifth Schedule and determine the extent of error, by actual counting in 
each such package and may, for that purpose open all packages.  
 
7.  Checking of other declarations.-(1) The de clarations made on the  package or on the 
label affixed thereto, shall  be  examined with a view to ascertaining whether such 
declarations conform  to these rules and may be ensured either  at the factory level or at 
the depot of the factory . 
 (2)The additional declarations made on the package or on the label affixed thereto in 
respect of item (g) and (h) of sub-rule (1) of  rule 6 shall also be examined to ascertain 
whether they are adequate.  
 
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE 
Form A 
 
Weight Checking – Data Sheet 
 
A 
Particulars of Package                                                                          Name of Manufacturer/ Packer 
 Address Price Month Year 
 
B  
Commodity Classification 
Lot Size:                                                  Sample Size: 
Schedule First/ Second  
Page 40 of 43 

===== PAGE 41 =====

Class A/ B 
Maximum permissible error in percentage  
 
C Sample   Gross        Tare         Net                     Remarks 
No.         Weight      Weight      Weight/ error 
 
Weight  
Checking Data 
1 
200 
 
D  
Results 
 
Declared  Wt.                                                      Avg. 
Wt. 
 
E 
GENERAL COMMENTS WITH REGARD TO THE 
COMPLIANCE WITH THE ACT AND THE RULES MADE 
THEREUNDER 
 
F                                                        
                                                               Signature and name of the                     Signature and name of 
manufacturer/  
                                                                authorized person                                  packer authorized by 
manufacturer or         
                                                                                                                            any competent witness 
                                
                                                                         Place:  
Designation: 
Name: 
Time: 
 
Page 41 of 43 

===== PAGE 42 =====

Note: If the data sheet runs into more pages than one, the each continuation sheet shall bear the signatures specified in 
Part F. 
 
 
Form B 
 
Volume/ Length Checking – Data Sheet 
A 
Particulars of Package                                                                          Name of Manufacturer/ Packer 
 Address Price Month Year 
 
B  
Commodity Classification 
Lot Size:                                                  Sample Size: 
Schedule First/ Second  
Class A/ B 
Maximum permissible error in percentage  
 
C Sample   Gross        Tare         Net                     Remarks 
No.         Weight      Weight      Weight/ error 
 
Volume/ Length  
Checking Data 
1 
200 
 
D  
Results 
 
Declared Volume/ Length                   Avg. Volume/ Length   
 
E 
GENERAL COMMENTS WITH REGARD TO THE 
COMPLIANCE WITH THE ACT AND THE RULES MADE 
THEREUNDER 
 
Page 42 of 43 

===== PAGE 43 =====

Page 43 of 43 
F                                                        
                                                               Signature and name of the                  Signature and name of manufacturer/ 
                                                                authorized person                              packer authorized by manufacturer or   
                                                                                                                          any competent witness 
                                
                                                                         Place:  
Designation: 
Name: 
Time: 
 
Note: If the data sheet runs into more pages than one, the each continuation sheet shall 
bear the signatures specified in Part F. 
 